Hello, everyone. Welcome to a new episode of the
Dissenter. I'm your host, as always, Ricardo Lopez, and
today I'm joined by Doctor Philip Nitschke. He's an
Australian humanist, author, former physician, and founder and director
of the pro-euthanasia group Exit International. And today we're
going to talk mostly about assisted suicide. So, Doctor
Nitschke, welcome to the show. It's a pleasure to
have everyone.
Yeah, very, very glad to join you.
So let's start here by clarifying some terms. First
of all, what is assisted suicide? What is euthanasia,
and what is voluntary euthanasia?
Well, I think assisted suicide explains itself effectively. I
mean, suicide is an act where you end your
own life and if you If you, uh, get
some assistance, I suppose that classifies as assisted suicide.
Euthanasia has come to mean the, uh, provision of,
uh, uh, whatever one might need to end one's
life with or without the person's consent. In other
words, someone does something to you, uh, to peacefully,
that is the, uh, the word euthanasia, peaceful death
to peacefully end your life. And, uh, I suppose
voluntary euthanasia, well, that's a situation where that provision
of a service to end your life is done
at specific request of the individual who wishes to
die. So, I mean, that's usual the way the
way those words and divisions are, are, uh, are
defined. Mhm.
So let me ask you just a couple of
more personal questions. When did you start advocating for
assisted suicide and what led you there?
Uh, LOOK, it wasn't, uh, it wasn't something that
was a passion in my life. I've been involved
in a lot of different issues, and some of
them social change issues throughout my life, but I
did medicine late, rather late in life, and, uh,
and I suppose I'd only just, and I'd only
just finished my medical training when, uh, I was
working in my, uh, I went back to my
home, uh, city, which didn't have a medical school.
I'd gone to Sydney to do medicine. I went
back to Darwin in the Northern Territory of Australia
and heard. That there was about to be this
new introduction of a piece of legislation which would
allow a doctor to give a, a lethal injection
to a terminally ill patient. Uh, I heard about
it on the radio. Um, I thought, good idea,
and went back to bed. Uh, AND, uh, was
really surprised and taken aback by the immense opposition
that, uh, unfolded in the next, effectively 24 hours.
There was a huge reaction from my new profession,
particularly, that was followed up by the church in
the later days. But initially it was the immense
and rather totally surprising reaction. I thought it was
a good idea. The people of the, uh, the
public, Uh, I thought it was a good idea.
The pop the politician who had suggested it was
very, was being applauded for being very forward-thinking. We,
I realized, because it became clear that, in fact,
this was the first time this was likely anywhere
in the world, which was a bit unusual because
the Northern Territory of Australia is not known for
progressive anything, really. It's considered to be something of
a reactionary backwater. But in any, any event, uh,
here on this rare occasion, they were suggesting something
which hadn't been done anywhere else. And I, and
as I said, I thought it was a good
idea. The public thought it was a good idea,
but the medical profession came right out hard and
said, no. We're having nothing to do with this,
and that was, uh, mediated through organizations such as
the Australian Medical Association, Powerful bodies, but nevertheless, just
professional bodies. And what was of interest to me
was that they then started to say things like,
uh look, uh, don't even start, don't even try
bringing in such a law because no doctor, In
the Northern Territory will cooperate. In other words, they
were threatening to try and wreck the piece of
legislation. And so that's how I got involved, because
I thought, well, that's, that's wrong. I, uh, was
in agreement with most of the public. Um, BUT
I thought this new profession that I've just joined
is now effectively telling the public what they need
to think about and how they should judge us
an initiative such as this. And I don't, I
didn't think the medical profession had any right to
do this. They were taking this line that you
might think it's a good idea, that is the
public, but we know what's best for you. And
it was that effectively, what seemed to me to
be a quite patronizing attitude about something as fundamental
as death by a profession which was setting itself
up as some sort of particular body that knew
more about this important issue than the public. And
I thought that was one step too far. And
I'd become, I was a little suspicious about my
profession in a lot of, uh, areas where I
figured I'd moved a little bit too far into
the, uh, areas of knowing what's best for the
rest of us. And so this annoyed me. So
I got involved politically because there was a long
period then, uh, about, about a year of debate
going on before it was going to be voted
on in that small parliament of the Northern Territory,
and in that time, Uh, I found myself really
battling against, against the medical profession because the public
was starting to, to be affected by this idea
that, well, we think it's a good idea, but
all these doctors are saying it's a bad idea.
Maybe they know something that we don't know, and
we're starting to eat away at the support, and
then the church weighed in, in a big way.
And said they were doing having nothing, now Northern
Territory is the most secular place in Australia, but
nevertheless, it was all having an impact and uh
and uh it wasn't looking like it was going
to be as successful when it finally came to
the votes it it first looked like. I got
together what seemed to be a very small group
of doctors who supported it. I could only find
10 or 15, I think we got over the
whole territory out of some 700 doctors. Most of
the doctors just said, no, nothing to do with
it. We took out a full page ad and
became involved politically. Uh, IT went to the vote,
and it passed by one vote. It was a
small parliament of, uh, 25 politicians, and it split
1312. And that's how the legislation came in by
one vote. Uh, AND it was an ugly, dirty
campaign that was being waged, uh, by the doctors
and by the, uh, church and by other opponents.
Many claiming it was racist legislation. The territory's got
a large population of indigenous Aboriginal people, and they
were saying, look, This is an attempt to try
and, uh, well, effectively, it was being cast or,
or being pitched to some form of new genocide.
In other words, it was going to be used
selectively against black people. It would discourage them from
seeking medical advice. All of these arguments were being
wheeled out. Uh, AND, uh, I was quite pleased
when it eventually did pass by that one vote,
but then it became my problem because the politicians
effectively said, Well, we've done our job, now it's
your problem, and indeed it was. Because it was
a difficult piece of legislation to try and use,
but effectively, eventually we got it, we got it
working.
Uh, WHEN and why did people start calling you
Doctor Death? Where does the nickname come from?
Well, it effectively started on the very first day
the legislation was used. The first person who tried
to use it failed miserably. He came all the
way to Darwin to use it, and I couldn't
get doctors to sign his papers. The legislation needed
for doctor signatures. I couldn't get anyone. He went
back home again and died horribly. But the next
person that tried to use it, I did manage
to find a supportive doctor, and then a supportive
psychiatrist and got it signed. But on the day
that he did choose to die, Uh, it was
in the it came into effect on the 1st
of July in 1996, uh, and it was used
in September of that year, so it had been
in place for 3 months, that law before I
finally managed one of my patients who was terminally
ill with prostate cancer. Um, PRESSED a button on
a machine that I'd built so that it delivered
the, uh, the machine delivered the lethal injection. I
set it up and everything, but he pressed the
button. And while I was sitting there watching this
first death take place, cause I had, I was
there, I had to be present, but I didn't
have to actually push the plunger, the machine did
that. But I realized at that time that things
were going to be different, and indeed they were.
And in fact, that was the day when the
label effectively was first used. When it first When
the news broke that it had been used, that
it was the first legal lethal voluntary injection in
the world. Um, uh, EFFECTIVELY became, uh, attracted that,
uh, that label or epithet, and it didn't, uh,
I guess it didn't surprise me because it was
a, it was a very fiercely fought and quite
ugly campaign, the politics behind it, getting it moving,
and I guess a bit of name-calling wasn't to
be too wasn't too surprising.
What are the main arguments you have in favor
of assisted suicide?
Well, it was. It was a straightforward situation as
far as I was concerned. As I said, I
heard about it on the radio. I thought, gosh,
if I was dying, I would want to be,
I would, I would like to make the, uh,
decision myself. Uh, I couldn't imagine why anyone else
wouldn't want to make that decision. The idea that
someone would sit there and say to me, no,
uh, we don't think you should have access to
these drugs that could, you could use to put
an end to your suffering just seemed strange. I
knew that because I was, uh, by this stage,
I'd had some medical training. I knew what drugs
I could get, so I sensed that I was
in a good position. And I couldn't see why
other people wouldn't want to be in what I
thought was that same good position to be able
to have that control if I got to that
position. And I found the arguments that were being
used against that option, particularly the ones that the
medical profession were trying to use to be quite,
quite false. Uh, AND in fact, fed into this
idea. Of the profession being very paternalistic, uh, and
very, uh, and very, um, I am very, very
comfortable with trying to tell people about the way
they should live and in particular the way they
should die.
Do you think there's any risk that some people
might use assisted suicide just to find relief in
death?
Well, I don't find that troubling. I mean, if
death is a relief, uh, the only way that
the relief that you are seeking can be obtained,
you should certainly, I would say, have that option.
It's a precious gift of life. We know that.
I understand this, but what sort of a gift
is a gift that you can't give away? Uh,
IF you've got come to that position that now
you realize it's a permanent step, but things are
so bad, and the only only solution that you
can see, To end what you're going through is
by divesting yourself of this precious gift. Why shouldn't
you have that choice? And that's the way I
see it, as I had always seen it, that
this was, this was something that I would decide
on. If I decide to give up my life,
I want to know I can. I do know
I can because I've got access to the means.
And why wouldn't anyone else want that choice too?
So it just seemed to be a strange argument
to deny a person that option.
Mhm. Uh, WHO are the people or institutions that
you find tend to oppose uh assisted suicide the
most and what kinds of arguments are you most
frequently confronted with?
Well, the ones that I've been, I've been battling
most of my for the subsequent next 30 years
or 25 or 30 years it's been, uh, I've
been involved in this issue from that, uh, initial
introduction. The predominant opposition that I find myself dealing
with is coming from within my profession, the one
which I've now effectively left, uh, luckily from the
medical profession. The opposition from the doctors has been
the most, the one that I've found myself most
often having to confront, although, of course, there are
plenty of other groups that don't like, uh, our
support, my support for this issue. And as I've
indicated, the church and various religious organizations, etc. BUT
the medical profession is the most interesting one to
me. And the arguments they use are ones which
I find quite, quite, uh, quite false. Now, you
may, uh, be aware that over the 20 or
30 years that I've been involved, and this is
the attitude of many of the, uh, professional bodies
associated with medicine have changed their position slowly, grudgingly.
They have changed their position now to come around
to a, if you like, a weak support for
the idea. Uh, AND then that's how many of
the pieces of legislation that have come in around
the world since that time, because that law in
the Northern Territory was the world's first, but it
was followed a few months after, it only lasted
8 months, I might add, before it was overturned
by the national government of Australia. But shortly after
that, in 1997, Oregon and America brought in laws
and then many other states, Canada, and the Netherlands
where I'm now based in 2001, all brought in
laws. But uh the concern was that in these
pieces of legislation, many of these places made the
same trouble, made, made the same mistake of bringing
in laws, I would call it a mistake, where
control of the process is determined by the medical
profession. In other words, they bring in what's known
as medical laws. As was a medical law, you
had to be sick enough to be eligible, and
you had to prove you were sick enough by
getting your, if you like, level of suffering assessed
by several doctors. And my concern is the fact
that that law, by its very nature, sets up
the gatekeeping to the whole process and hands it
over to a particular group, that is the medical
profession. And I would argue that that group has,
has, is in no position to accept that or
take on that responsibility. In fact, I think it's
a, It's a mistake to give it to them.
Uh, YEAH, that's what many places have done, and
these days I spend a lot of time urging
people not to do that, to take on laws
which are different where that control isn't given to
a particular group, but that that control stays seated
in the individual themselves.
What do you think about palliative care?
Well, palliative care, certainly, I, I, I think I
went through medical training in Sydney, and I don't
think the word euthanasia was mentioned once, and I
think palliative care was mentioned once or twice. It
wasn't exactly given prominence, but I was well aware
of its existence. And in fact, when that piece
of law came in in 1997, 1 of the
conditions was that any individual seeking help to die
would have had to have their so-called palliative care
options explained to them. And so I learned quite
a bit about palliative care in that stage, and
uh, I was totally supportive of it. Of course,
if there are things that you can do to
alleviate your suffering. Uh, AND if your suffering is
caused by something which is alleviatable, um, go, you
should have it. You should have that option. And
if it's some sort of skilled schooled provision of
some, uh, special drug, of course, you should have
access to anything that might make the level of
suffering less. And if that level of suffering. Lessons
to the point where you don't feel that death
is the only solution, that's great, it's wonderful, it's
something to be encouraged, and of course people should
have access to the best means, if that's the
issue. But of course, what I've found over the
years is that many people have other issues which
are simply not issues that can be resolved by
some skilled medical treatment, or by some skilled medical
profession, such as palliative care. People with social reasons
for wanting to die, which are very compelling. And
so there's no point saying that palliative care is
gonna solve the issue. It's a good, it's an
important specialty, people should have provision to it, but
let's not kid ourselves that it's going to remove
anyone's desire to die.
Right. Just for people to get a clearer picture
of how bad things can get, uh, how bad
can people's situations get if they do not have
access to assisted suicide?
Well, I mean, it's just, I mean, people, a
lot of people die in all sorts of ways
and some of those ways, especially. With some of
the, uh, some of the medical conditions that can
bring about death can be extremely difficult. Uh, THERE
has been some wonderful improvements in very many of
the, uh, alleviating many of the symptoms associated with,
uh, often terminal illnesses. But, I mean, you don't
have to look very far to find diseases which
produce symptoms, which would make your life so miserable
and unrelievably miserable. Uh, THAT I have no difficulty
at all. One of the problems I found with
doing medicine, I had problem, but one of the
things I hadn't, I had underestimated was just how
many bizarre and unusual diseases there are out there,
which I wish I didn't know about. The fact
is that there are a lot, and that they
can produce immense degrees of suffering. But as I
said, that's not always the issue. Many people, for
example, seek ending their life, not just because of
the suffering which may or may not be relievable
with careful uh provision of special drugs. But I
remember clearly one of the first people that I
became involved with after that new law came in
and said to me, look, I want to die,
um, I've got breast cancer, I've had really good
palliative care, they've alleviated most of the symptoms, but
I want to die, and I said why? And
she said, because I can't do what I want
to do, I'm just here, I'm not uncomfortable, I'm
not in pain, but I can't do what I
want to do. I said, what do you mean?
She said, well, I can't, I can't get up
and play golf anymore. And I say, Well, is
that a reason for Di? She said, it may
not be your reason. But it's my reason. And
so I've had wonderful palliative care, in fact, when
I. Decided she, she should have access to this
new law. Her palliative care doctors were very, very
upset. They said, look, she's a, a triumph of
palliative care. She's a person who's responded wonderfully to
these drugs. We've got rid of all these nasty
symptoms, she's not vomiting, she's lost her diarrhea, she
hasn't got any pain. Why does she want to
die? And I said, Well, it's not up to
you to tell her that she should want to
live. Her reasons were ones that they clearly had
trouble understanding. And I must say that it was
a good lesson for me to stop trying to
put my views about what a life worth living
is on other people. So I'll let other people
make that final decision.
Do you think that prisoners who have been sentenced
to life in prison should also have access to
assisted suicide?
Yeah, I think that, uh, I think that I,
I mean, the idea with the enthusiasm many of
our governments have for putting people in prison forever
because they've done such bad things with no pretense
at rehabilitation or correction of whatever the crime was
that they originally committed. Is effectively the provision of
what I would describe as some form of permanent
or indefinite torture. Uh, NOW, I don't think the
state should be involved in torturing people. And if
you're going to accept the fact that the state
has a right to effectively provide indefinite torture, then
I think they have an obligation and at least
to allow that person, To have access to the
only means that they would have normally to put
an end to that suffering. Now, if they're in,
uh, outside of a prison, sir, of course they
could end their lives. People can always stand in
front of trains, but, uh, to lock someone up
and put them in a place where they then
can't take this one avenue that you've got, surely,
the one right that you must be able to
preserve is the right to divest yourself of your
life. And I don't think the state has any
right to take that away. Now, They say, well,
we don't have to help you, but I mean,
uh, what they do is, of course, make it
impossible by not providing places where people can, they
don't, they don't make it easy for people to
end their lives if they're effectively incarcerated in life
without parole. The idea seems to be to put
them in a place where they can't take their
life and make them suffer indefinitely, and that's, as
I said, I the state being involved in torture
and something I don't condone at all.
Do you defend the right to die? Is that
something that you also defend or not?
Yes, it is. I mean, as I said, I
think it's a precious gift of life, but it's
a fundamental right to be able to divest yourself
of a gift that you don't want. And I
think this is a fundamental right, um. And it
needs to be respected. I don't think governments should
be weighing in and arguing with people who say
they wish to end their life. If a person
wishes to end their life, and it's a rational
decision, they're not talking about a decision by someone
who's mentally compromised, or a person who's lost what
we've described as mental capacity. But a person who
makes an informed decision that now is the time
they wish to defend themselves of their precious gift
of life, that needs to be accepted, and I
would argue, the means to means to carry out
this, uh, this request provided for the individual. Now,
that's not a popular view. Uh, SOME people say,
oh, yes, but only in cases of interminable or
suffering or terminal illness where you're just about to
drop dead anyway. But I would say it's much
more fundamental than this, this should be for any
rational adult.
In contemporary society and in contemporary medicine, suicide tends
to get medicalized, but do you think it should
be medicalized?
No, and I think it was one of the,
uh, another example of where the uh where the
enthusiasm of the medical profession to move into these
areas by medicalizing the concept of suicide, turning it
effectively into a disease which needs treating. Uh, IS
one of the, one of the concerns, because what
that says is that every person who seeks suicide
or carries out or plans or looks at looks
at suiciding is mentally ill. In other words, you're
defining a disease here. Now, That's just not true
in many cases. It's true that you can have
mental illnesses that do, in fact, mean that you
end up taking that step and wanting to end
your life. And those people clearly should not be
given medical assistance to take that step. But there
is a phenomenon known as rational suicide, where a
person from no mental illness, or with a mental
illness which is not severe enough to destroy their
mental capacity, that is their ability to freethink. Makes
a decision that now's the time that they wish
to die, and to try and say that every
person who wishes to die is somehow or other
mentally ill and needs treatment for the mental illness,
rather than accepting that they have a fundamental right
to carry out this step, I think is a
big mistake, and it's one that still persists within
the medical profession today.
But tell us a little bit about your organization,
Exit International. What is it? How did it come
to be and what are its main goals?
Yeah, I started it, I started it very soon.
As I mentioned, that legislation which I first became
involved in was in 1996, lasted eight months. Four
of my patients received uh lethal injections from the
machine that I had built, and then the law
was overturned and, That meant that Australia effectively went
back into the dark ages where assistance to suicide
is a serious crime, which is an interesting paradox
because suicide is not a crime. But assistance to
suicide, the person who provides that assistance is in
serious breach of the law and uh in some
of the very savage penalties, not just, it's not
a slap on the wrist. If you assist a
suicide, You can find yourself subject to legal proceedings
which could lead to a penalty, uh life in
prison, which is the most serious penalty in Australia,
they don't have access to the death penalty. So
a serious penalty for helping someone do something which
is lawful. Uh, IS the issue, so many people
still wanted to have this ability to end their
lives, even though the law changed and we went
back into the dark ages. So I set up
an organization whereby I could effectively give them advice
on how to do that, how they could take
their own lives. Give them the information they needed
so that they could then successfully suicide. Part of
the problem of suicide is, is that you can't
get good information about what works and what doesn't
work. And many people take the wrong drugs in
the wrong amounts, hoping to end their lives and
finding out that they fail. So setting up an
organization, which initially set out to try and give
good information, publishing that information in a handbook that
I wrote with my partner, Fiona Stewart, Peaceful Pill
Handbook, giving information so that people can make an
informed decision. OK, now's the time to die, and
now I know how to do it. That's how
Exit International was set up. We started to run
workshops around the world, teaching people what they needed
to know, because I was lucky I had that
information. Because of my training background, and I was
able to provide it to other people. Uh, AND
I got away from this idea of just thinking
this was something that a doctor should decide to
dole out to people who were particularly sick enough
to, if you like, satisfy my criteria. It became
something which I saw as a human right to
have access to good information to inform people so
that they could make this step and take this
rational step themselves.
So you mentioned the book that you sell on
the Exit International website, the Peaceful Pill Handbook. What
is a peaceful ill?
Well, it's a, it's a bit of a, it's
a euphemism for some sort of simple, reliable, peaceful
way where you can end your life. It became,
people, when you ask them, what do you want?
If you're wanting to die, what, how do you
want to carry out this? Most people would say,
Look, I just want something I can just take
as a pill or take as a drink. Something
simple. Lie back, go to sleep and die while
I'm asleep. That's the general answer. We've surveyed hundreds
of people, thousands of people about this. They all
say effectively the same thing. We want something simple.
Now I said, oh, so you want a pill,
yes, we want a pill. I said, we want
a peaceful pill, so that became, if you like,
a metaphor or a euthanism for some simple reliable,
peaceful way where you can control uh the dying,
the end of your own life.
But is this something that people can do themselves?
Yeah,
it has, and it has to be something you
can do yourself. I mean, I'm not suggesting that
other people should come around and do things to
you. In fact, when people started to talk about
the, uh, where law, they said, when laws came
in, all right, well I'd like a doctor to
come around and help me die, well, I say,
Well, why do you want someone to help you?
You can do it. But you need to know
what to do, and you need to have access
to the right means to do it. You don't
have to try and share the decision making with
someone else, especially you don't have to have a
doctor. This idea that effectively, and it's been effectively
projected by the profession over medical profession over the
decades, saying that effectively people feel they can't die,
unless they've got a doctor standing by the bedside.
Now this is ludicrous, you're gonna die whether you've
got a doctor or not, and so the idea
that you need a doctor there is something which
I think is, I think rather unconscionably projected and
uh by the medical profession who likes to see
themselves and putting themselves in this position of authority
and power. Uh, AND I spent a lot of
my time saying, look, if you want to die,
I'll accept your decision for whatever reason. As long
as it's an informed and rational decision. You don't
need a doctor, you don't need anyone to stand
there, you can do it yourself, you just gotta
have the way, you've got to know, you gotta
have the information, and you've got to have the
means. And if one's, if that's provided, which I
think it should be provided, I think people live
happier and longer lives, which is why we urge
most of our members, the average age of membership
to exit is 75. We urge members all around
the world, look, get the drugs, if you, if
you're thinking of a drug, get the drugs, make
sure they're correct, test them, make sure that they're
pure, put them in the cupboard, lock them away
and hope you never need them. And that'll put
you into position where you don't have to worry
about what's happening with these pieces of legislation with
all their safeguards and conditions which are coming in
around the world.
But do you think that if people have uh
the pills, the drugs at home in the cupboard,
there's a risk that in an act of impulsivity,
they might take the drugs and end their lives
just impulsively.
Well, it's possible. I mean, I, I guess that's
true of me. I mean, I've got the drugs.
I've had them for the last 30 years, and
they're in the cupboard, and I suppose if I
woke up, uh, and felt in a really bad
state, I could go to the cupboard and I
can do it at the end of this interview
and end my life. Um, BUT I haven't done
it so far. I feel quite good that I
could, I, I've got this choice if I wanted
to. So this idea that we've got to people
from themselves is the question. I don't need protecting
from myself. I want the drugs and I've got
them. I can't imagine why you wouldn't want the
drugs, and I would say that you should get
them and put them in the cupboard. So is
there a risk that you might have a bad
day, wake up and think, oh my God, luckily,
I've got something in the cupboard and go and
kill yourself. It's a risk, I suppose, but what
you will do is benefit. Generally, from knowing day
after day, month after month, year after year that
you have control, doesn't matter what the law says,
you have that control, it's in the cupboard.
So it's a matter of control then.
It is, and that control makes you feel more
comfortable, and I would argue, less inclined to precipitous
action. And probably, we see a lot of evidence
of this, a happier person, when you're in control
and one who lives longer. So it's a paradox
that having lethal drugs in the cupboard actually means
that people generally live longer.
Mhm. Uh, WHAT do you think about, uh, voluntary
euthanasia laws in countries like the Netherlands where you're
based in right now, and Switzerland, which if, as
far as I understand, is the country with the
more progressive laws in the, on the planet.
Yes, I mean, the laws since that first legislation
I worked with back in the Northern Territory, and
as I said, Oregon came a year later, they've
predominantly all been the same. Uh, WHICH are medical
laws, in other words, you've got to wait till
you're very sick, often terminally ill. You've then got
to go off and see a doctor, usually several
doctors, to convince them that you are indeed dying,
and then maybe they will allow you to have
access to the drugs that might bring about your
end of life. The one except they're medical laws
where effectively it's a privilege doled out to people
that are sick enough to be eligible. But, uh,
Switzerland is unique. It's quite a separate situation where
they actually enshrine the idea that this is a
right. In other words, you don't have to be
sick in Switzerland, you don't have to convince a
doctor of anything other than that you have sound
mind. And the idea of having a sound. Mind
or mental capacity is universal and so it should
be, uh, as one of the requirements. But the
idea that it doesn't have to be a privilege
which other people will decide upon, is what is
unique about Switzerland and why I totally support the
Swiss model.
So in Switzerland, uh, if I understand it correctly,
and please correct me if I'm wrong, the only
two criteria is that the person should be an
adult and should have mental capacity.
Is that correct? That's correct. Under Swiss law, that
is the situation, yes.
And, and what does having mental capacity mean? How
do you evaluate
that? It's an interesting concept. I mean, it's, uh,
it's, it's, it's a concept which comes up everyday
living all the time. When you go and sign
your name for a new bank account, people have
to decide when you make a will, they have
to decide, do you know what you're doing? In
other words, have you got the ability to make
rational decisions in your best interests? And there are
some illnesses which mean that you lose mental capacity.
And of course the traditional one that people talk
about commonly is dementia associated usually with a disease
like Alzheimer's disease, where a person loses the ability
to make decisions in their best interests and so
we say they have lost mental capacity. If you
have mental capacity though, you can indeed open up
a bank account, you can indeed stand in front
of a, uh, in a courtroom and give evidence
under oath. And indeed, if you have mental capacity
under some under the new laws that have come
in in many countries, you need to have mental
capacity before you can authorize or ask for the
help you would need to be able to end
your life. So mental capacity, it's a rather nebulous
concept. Uh, PSYCHIATRISTS often argue that they're the only
ones who can determine it, whether an individual has
capacity or not. There are still many doctors who
believe that if you've got any mental illness, you
don't have mental capacity. And there are plenty of
doctors who argue that if you're thinking of suicide,
you certainly don't have mental capacity. So arguments rage
about what constitutes mental capacity. But when we get
people who come along and want help to die,
we do have to have mental capacity. So generally
speaking, That means I would take a person off
to see a psychiatrist. The psychiatrist will spend half
an hour talking to them, and decide, yes, this
person knows exactly what they're doing. They know it's
a permanent step. They know it's irreversible. They know
what they're planning and what effect it will have
on others around them. I think this person has
mental capacity and they sign a bit of paper.
Now, that's a problem trying to find psychiatrists to
do this. And so we've been working, and I've
been spending a lot of time working on an
artificial intelligence assessment of mental capacity. Uh, I think
it's a much, it's going to be a much
fairer way of doing it, but nevertheless, it is
a necessary criteria.
Mhm. Uh, WHAT would you say are the ingredients
required for the successful passage of a law on
voluntary euthanasia? So let's say that there are people
in countries where euthanasia is not legal and they
would be interested in trying to. Uh, PASS such
a law in parliament or some other place like
that. So, uh, I mean, what are, what are
the steps that they can take?
Well, we've seen this happen. It's been happening around
the world that country after country after country have
been arguing about this issue. The Northern Territory was
first. Oregon came in uh a year later. Then,
of course, there was other states in America, there's
Canada, and then there's, uh, Luxembourg, um, Netherlands, Belgium.
All of these places are brought in laws, and
always they go through the same process where people
will start talking to the poli those in, in
control in the political process in the country we're
dealing with, and say we would like a law,
and the general way it's pitched is that we
want some sort of a legislative process whereby a
person, Who is suffering can get help to die,
and that invariably gets translated into something whereby a
law is, if you can argue well enough, politicians
agree that a law should be brought in which
will allow and then the conditions start. And depending
on how, uh, much, uh, pressure is under, the
politicians find themselves under. They will either make it
extremely restrictive, or they will make it less restrictive.
But generally speaking, they have safeguard after safeguard after
safeguard. So the wrong person doesn't get help to
die. And generally speaking, that means you've got to
be seriously, seriously ill, usually just about dead. You've
got to get other people to determine that you
are just about dead. In other words, doctor after
doctor after doctor sign, sign, sign. Then you have
to go through waiting periods. You then have to
decide whether you're in the right place. You can't
go from one country to another and use their
laws, all sorts of conditions come in. But if
you satisfy, satisfy, satisfy, satisfy, and they're just about
dead, Then generally speaking, with these new what we
call medicalized laws, a doctor will say, OK, you
satisfy all the criteria, you've gone through the waiting
period, here are the drugs, but you must take
them yourself. And then you can take the drugs
and die. So that's generally speaking, the process is
one of lobbying politicians, and depending on how anxious
the politicians are. The level of safeguards and the
restrictions that they decide to introduce increases, and we're
watching this play out right now in the United
Kingdom, where they're debating this, uh, legislation, that's finally,
it's gone through the lower house, it's out in
the House of Lords, and they're determining whether or
not it's restrictive enough, so that the wrong persons
don't get any assistance. And it's one of the
most restrictive pieces of law I've ever seen planned
in the world. I'll be surprised if anyone ever
gets to use it, it's so restrictive, but certainly
the wrong people will never get to use it,
whatever the wrong people are, but that's the sort
of political process that people have to go through.
So tell us about this fascinating new device, the
suicide pod or the sarco pod. Where is it,
uh, how it, how does it work, and I
mean, can it already be used for the purposes
of assisted suicide?
Yes, it's it's designed to help people with an
assisted suicide, and it's designed with uh specifically to
try and Get around this problem of uh trying
to always having to get permission from uh some
authority to be able to take this step. And
in countries that have brought in laws such as
here in the Netherlands, you've got to find a
doctor who will give you access to the best
drugs which are heavily restricted. So the idea of
building a device that doesn't use heavily restricted drugs,
so effectively you don't have to go off and
seek permission. And you don't have to wait till
you're terminally ill or suffering enough to get a
Dutch doctor to agree with you. We decided to
build a device, and that was one that uses
gas, which is not restricted. And we decided to
use the inert gas nitrogen. And the plan is
that, of course, it's a way that people for
many years have used to end their lives when
they wish, in other words, decision to die themselves,
without any access to hard to get drugs or,
Any other support or knowledge, they've known that if
you suddenly put yourself into an environment where there
is no oxygen, It's a very peaceful day. Perhaps
that's surprising to people. Many people think that's surprising.
Wouldn't it be awful? But it's not, actually. But,
so what people have done for years is that
they've filled up plastic bags with some inert gas,
usually something like helium or nitrogen, where there's no
oxygen. And they've suddenly put the plastic bag full
of that gas which has no oxygen over their
head and breathe deeply. And what that does is
replace the gas in your lungs, which is air,
which has 20% oxygen in it, and the rest
is nitrogen. You're replacing that with 100% nitrogen, so
there is no oxygen in your lungs. The blood
comes up past your lungs, on its way to
your brain to take that oxygen, which is stuck
onto the red blood cells through the hemoglobin. And
suddenly there's no oxygen in your lungs, so there's
nothing for the blood to take to your brain.
Your brain has no oxygen, known as hypoxia. Cerebral
hypoxia, your brain has a very low oxygen. It
needs oxygen, and so your brain starts to switch
off important functions. And the first one is that
you lose consciousness. In other words, you faint. So
usually after two deep breaths of pure nitrogen, getting
rid of all the oxygen out of your lungs,
you quickly faint. And while you're unconscious, you keep
on breathing easily with a plastic bag full of
nitrogen over your head and your oxygen level at
0, and you die in 5 or so minutes.
So that's the process. It's been used for many,
many years, but people don't like the idea of
a plastic bag. They say, I don't like all
this equipment with cylinder of gas and a tube
and a regulator and a plastic bag. I don't
want to be found like that. In which case,
I say, well, Why don't we make something that
looks a bit more elegant, something a little more
stylish, and so the decision to build the 3D
printed saco. Uh, CAME about, it's really a way
of making a glorified plastic bag, if you like,
you climb in. To this 3D capsule, it looks
like a vehicle which is going somewhere, it's not
going anywhere, but it looks like it, you can
take it to that nice place where you can
lawfully end your life because suicide is not a
crime. Press the button inside the capsule. You close
the capsule, wave goodbye to all your friends. Close
the capsule, Press the button, and what that does
is suddenly flood that capsule with replacing the air
which you're breathing with pure nitrogen, so that there's
suddenly you're breathing, but there's no oxygen, and you
faint quickly and die in the capsule. So that's
the, uh, that's the process. It's work, uh, it
took some time to get it. Operational. It looks
very good. It's been used once in Chapels and
in Switzerland, and that's upset, uh, the Swiss authorities
to the extent which they're still trying to work
out whether or not any crime was committed. Uh,
WE'RE not sure why they are even thinking that
there could have been, but that's what they're arguing
about now, and the device itself remains confiscated by
the Swiss authorities, but, We're building another one, and
I think that for many people they see this
as something which is really desirable, as I said,
it stops you having to go around and try
and get access to these heavily restricted drugs because
of course nitrogen is everywhere and it can't be
restricted.
Right, but then, uh, this device is activated by
the person herself from the interior. Is
that right? That's true. That's true. The only way
it can be activated is by pressing the button
inside. Uh, WE expect now to modify the new
one which is being printed now whereby you'll have
to pass a mental capacity test. Uh, AND that
will allow power to switch onto the capsule, so
you can't press the button until you've carried out
a mental capacity test. And when you press that
button, Within 30 seconds, the oxygen level has dropped
from the normal 21% in the air we're breathing
now down to less than 0.5%, and you'll die
very quickly.
Mhm. Yes, I asked you that because I was
wondering what do you think should be the role,
if any, of the physician when it comes to
assisted suicide? Because if I understand it correctly, sometimes
it seems that people want someone else to share
in the decision making. And so, uh, possibly some
people would want another. Person to activate the pod
or in, in cases where they would have an
injection to kill them if they would want someone
else to do that. So what do you think
about that? Yeah,
it worries me. I mean, you're right, many people
do say that. They say, oh, I want someone
there. I want or I want the injection rather
than a drink. It's as if they want someone
to do it to them. Now I'm thinking to
myself, well, look, it's your desk. You've got to
take responsibility. This idea that you're trying to share
in that decision making with another individual, possibly a
doctor, is, I think, something which needs to be
looked at quite closely because what you seem to
be doing is saying, I can't make up my
own mind, I want someone to share in the
decision-making process. Now I'm quite happy, To provide support
and to accept a person's decision. But I do
not want to be made co-decision maker with a
person wishing to die. If you want to die,
you make the decision. Now, you don't need help,
you don't need someone there, you don't need an
injection and someone pressing the syringe. The reason I
built the first machine I did, which is now
in the British Museum, uh, Science Museum in London.
Is because I thought I could go around to
that man's place. This was in Darwin in 1996
and give a lethal injection. The man dying of
prostate cancer, Bob Dent said, come around for lunch,
I'll die in the afternoon. And I thought, right,
well, I could sit there and push the plunger
after getting a needle into a vein and he
would die at the end of the needle. But
I didn't see why I should become an executioner,
and I couldn't see why I should have to
do that. He wanted to die, I accepted and
supported his decision. But he shouldn't, and he didn't
expect or insist that I be part of that
process in a mechanical sense. So that's why I
built the machine. So he pressed the button. He
looked at the questions on the laptop and pressed
the button, and the machine ended his life. So,
I'm a bit skeptical, and we've seen happening here
in the Netherlands over the last decade or so,
more and more people when they get, uh, The
right for help to die through Dutch law, have
asked to have an injection rather than a drink.
Now, it's the same drug, and you can drink
it and you'll die, you can have it injected
and you'll die. But our concern, my concern, and
many of the doctors I talked to here in
the Netherlands' concern is that effectively what people seem
to be saying is we want some other person
to share in the process. And I'm skeptical about
that, and I think in some ways that should
be resisted. And I think you should be saying,
yes, you have every right to do it, but
don't, you don't have a right, if you like,
to try and involve other people in that decision
making, and I would push back on that.
What do you think about conscientious objection on the
part of physicians when it comes particularly to assisted
suicide?
That's uh that's fine. I mean, I understand that
many people will never accept. Uh, THAT a person
has a right to divest themselves of this precious
gift of life. I mean, if you believe that
your life is a precious gift from God, and
many people do, then, uh, only person or only
entity that can make this decision about the best
of this precious gift is God. That argument is
one that I get exposed to a lot. Now,
I don't mind if people hold those views. They're
not my views. And I don't want them to
try and push those views onto me. But if
they want to hold them, that's OK by me.
And if you held those views, you would see
that it's a crime to divest yourself of your
life. And you wouldn't want to be participating in
or, uh, in, in any way assisting someone else
to carry out what you see as some fundamental
violation of God's law. And so it needs to
be, I think, supported, and so of course there
should be a provision for people to, Uh, dissent
and have nothing to do with the process. And
that's effectively what is the case in the laws
that are coming around the world. There's no obligation
on the part of a doctor to participate in
these laws which require medical participation, and a person,
a doctor, or for that matter, the person who
prescribes the drugs or the nurses, but they can
all effectively say, I want no part of it,
that's fine. But they should not. As many of
them then do, argue that there should be no
one taking part in this. If you believe in
it, of course you should take part in it.
I believe in the process and I would support
this idea of providing the means at any time
to a rational person wanting to make this decision.
Many times when people argue in favor of euthanasia
or specifically assisted suicide, they mentioned the importance of
the patient's autonomy and self-determination. Uh, WHAT do you
think? About that, what does autonomy and self-determination mean
in this particular context?
Well, I think that's it is it's a person's
autonomy if you like, is that what I would,
I would argue is the important issue here. Uh,
THAT the individual must take responsibility for their own
life. They do this by eating when they feel
hungry. They do this by drinking when they're thirsty,
they sleep. They're taking responsibility for the necessary requirements
of keeping their life in existence, and I think
they should take responsibility for this decision about when
they decide that they do not wish to keep
on living. So, that idea of personal responsibility and
taking control of that process is something we accept.
Uh, AND I think, a natural, I would say
a fundamental extension of that option or that right,
or that obligation to stay on this planet is
the, uh, acceptance of a person's ability to make
a decision that now is the time that I
wish to divest myself of this precious gift. So,
uh, that idea of personal responsibility, I think is
fairly fundamental, and it's one that we enshrine. And
accept without any question when it comes to all
of the other aspects of life. But when we
come to this one decision, that is the one
about whether or not we wish to die, suddenly,
we find ourselves surrounded by all this concern, opposition,
and criticism. It is changing. More and more places
are accepting that this is the way things are
changing. I think new technologies are going to make
The world a different place. It's true, for example,
that if we all had access to some simple
substance which would give us a peaceful death, one
can speculate on how that would change the world
we live in. I suspect that it'd make the
world a happier place. So I, we are getting
to the stage with new technologies where more and
more options will become available. And people will find
themselves impaired by this new availability which hadn't previously
existed.
So earlier when I asked you about the criteria
for assisted suicide, and I, we talked a little
bit about uh assessing mental capacity. You mentioned that
many times the state determines that it should be
assessed by psychiatrists and then if they are presented
with someone who's, who's wanting to end their lives,
they medicalize the issue and they deny them. Uh,
MENTAL capacity or if the person has already been
diagnosed with some mental illness, they also, uh, deny
them mental capacity because they say or they claim
that uh the mental illness itself, uh, affects the
person's decision making. Do you find that psychiatrists in
general are opposed to assisted suicide and if so,
why?
No, it's not a, I wouldn't say it was
general, but it is, uh, it is a problem
because, as I said, that view around that if
you've got a mental illness, you can't have mental
capacity. It's almost as if they are intrinsically linked.
Now that idea does persist, and it does persist
in some areas of psychiatry, although by no means
is that universal. We've generally been able to find
psychiatrists who do certainly accept the idea of rational
suicide. Generally speaking, they see that as being associated
in situations where there's a considerable degree of suffering,
usually from some form of physical illness, although there
are plenty of psychiatrists around who understand that there
are non-medical reasons, uh, that can bring about, if
you like, existential suffering and that that should still
not preclude one from taking this step because that
person will have mental capacity, but, It is an
issue, and that's why we're putting quite a lot,
and because you can take, and I often find
myself in this situation of taking the same person
to 4 different psychiatrists and getting 5 different answers
about what whether they've got capacity or not, that
I'm really hopeful and got a lot of, uh,
A lot of expectation for a development of an
artificial intelligence assessment of what this nebulous quality of
capacity actually means. Something that you can actually test
in a person and you either have it or
you don't have it. Now, I, I'm not saying
that if you have it today, you'll have it
tomorrow, but you could have it now, and if
you've got it now, and you're an adult, we're
not talking about children, we're talking about adults who
know about the permanence of death. I would argue
then you've got every right when you have mental
capacity as an adult, to say, now's the time
to die.
Uh, IF I remember correctly earlier when we talked
about mental capacity, you said that you were working
on developing some sort of AI tool to assess
mental capacity. Could you tell us a little bit
more about that? How would it be assessed through
AI?
It's a, it's a, it's a situation which effectively
mirrors the process which goes on when you uh
go and see a psychiatrist, you sit down and
they talk to you and they ask you about
uh your understanding of death, that do you know
about its permanence? Do you know that it will
have an impact if you die on people around
you, what do you think your family's going to
think? There's a whole heap of uh questions that
they talk with you about to get a fairly
clear idea that you understand exactly, What is involved
here. For example, if you saw a person who's
been seriously affected by an illness which makes, which
does deprive you of mental capacity, such as dementia,
you couldn't carry out such a conversation. Such a
conversation would simply be impossible. They would have no
idea of what the the concept of death and
dying, so. The artificial intelligence will effectively replace that
discussion that you have now with a psychiatrist with
one where you'll have it with the avatar. The
avatar will ask you all sorts of questions. Listen
to your answers, interpret those answers and lead on
to future interpretive questions to make sure that it
draws out from you in the conversation, the full
aspect of your understanding. A person who's got significant
dementia and has no mental capacity will be picked
very quickly by the avatar. The avatar then will
make the decision through a series of criteria and
come out yes or no. Now, what we will
do as far as the Parco is concerned, the
divisive job build is that that yes or no
will then allow the power to switch onto the
sarco for the next 24 hours. But the idea
of having a mental capacity test to replace a
psychiatrist, I think, is something which is, Will be
a very welcome, uh welcome initiative and change, I
understand people have said, what about bias, which may
be, may be built into the interrogation by the
by the avatar, I understand that. But right now
we've got bias which is built into the psychiatrists
who bring their own baggage, their own personal philosophies
to this issue, and often judge people, in effect,
in ways which are predetermined by their own, if
you like, religious or philosophical or political beliefs. So
there are issues here, but I'm sure it's gonna
be faster and better than the current assessment we
use.
Do you think that suicide should be prevented?
No, I, I don't think it should be prevented.
I'm not, I don't think it should be encouraged
or discouraged. I, I think we should accept that
it's a, it, it's a it's a phenomenon, as
I said, it seems to me about as relevant
as being able to give back a precious gift.
It needs to be accepted. It exists, it will
always exist. Uh, AND I don't think you should,
we should be objecting to it or fighting against
it. I think what we should try to do
is to try and minimize people who have, who
lose mental capacity, and then take steps to end
their own lives. That is a serious enough issue.
And that happens a lot. And it needs to
be, efforts need to be put into finding such
people and finding ways in which their mental capacity
can be re-established so that they don't decide to
take this step unless it's a valid, rational one.
Now, that's an issue. Uh, BUT this idea that
the suicides that are occurring around the world are
all due to failing mental capacity is simply false.
And that needs to be accepted that there will
always be a group of people who come to
a rational decision. And when I make that rational
decision that now's the time I want to die,
I want my views respected. And uh my decision
to take this step, uh, acknowledged as being a
valid and viable one, and not to be encouraged,
but certainly not to have obstacles put in my
path.
So I have one final question then. How do
you look at the future of assisted suicide, both
in terms of law and in terms of technological
advancements?
They, they are, yes, they're both, they're they're undergoing
a lot of change. Uh, I mentioned now we're
seeing a spate of laws coming in around the
world which are of these medicalized nature where we
try to define a level of suffering. These laws,
generally speaking, come into existence and are immediately challenged
within the courts, a person will say, well, I'm
suffering, you say I'm not suffering enough, I say
I am suffering enough, and so the questions about
degree of suffering will find their ways, working their
way through the courts. And slowly legislation will change.
In the case of the Netherlands, there's been a
series of situations where the laws, medical laws here
have been loosened up to some degree, but they've
certainly not freed up completely, and they're nowhere like
laws that Switzerland have, which actually enshrine this option
as a human right. So, I would like to
see laws rather than coming in. Radicalized and then
have to go through this protracted legal process to
free them up and make them more workable, that
people would initiate legislation which enshrines suicide as a
human right, like the Swiss law. I spent a
lot of time running around talking to parliamentary inquiries,
looking at new laws, arguing, for goodness sake, don't
make them the same mistakes we did. Look closely
at Switzerland and bring in a law that enshrines
this as a human right. So that's what I'm
hoping will happen. I don't see much evidence of
it, especially as I watch what's being played out
in the United Kingdom right now, where a very,
very, very medicalized law with a lot and lot
and a lot of restrictions is coming in. That's
the, that's the legislative political process. Technologically though, things
are changing too, because if people have access to
the means, laws become irrelevant. It doesn't matter what
the law says, if you've got something in the
cupboard, you don't care what the law says, because
you know that if I get to that point,
I'll go to the cupboard. I won't go off
finding trying to find a doctor who agrees with
me. I'll simply go to the cupboard. And that
is what's happening too. There are new strategies, new
initiatives. We're putting quite a lot of effort into
new initiatives and strategies where people will all, hopefully,
I would argue in the too distant future, have
something in their own cupboard. And so all of
the argument and debate that we're going through now
will effectively be for nothing, because it will be,
as I said, irrelevant.
Great. So, Dr. Nitschke, I will be leaving a
link in the description to your books and to
Exit International. Apart from that, are there any other
places on the internet where people can find your
work?
Oh, I think that, uh, I think the uh
their main websites peaceful Pill.com and Xinternational.net are the
main website, websites, so it's of course we adopt
the Facebook presence and a ex-presence and a And
they, uh, various other social media presences trying to,
I suppose, show people that changes are taking place
and to rekindle the investigation. We're running a, a
conference in Amsterdam at the end of the year
on new technologies for dying, and we're inviting people
to come along and look at some of these
strategies and see that this is a fast changing
world.
Great, really fascinating. So, Doctor Nitschke, thank you so
much for taking the time to come on the
show. It's been a real pleasure to talk with
you.
Thank you. It's very enjoyable.
Hi guys, thank you for watching this interview until
the end. If you liked it, please share it,
leave a like and hit the subscription button. The
show is brought to you by Nights Learning and
Development done differently, check their website at Nights.com and
also please consider supporting the show on Patreon or
PayPal. I would also like to give a huge
thank you to my main patrons and PayPal supporters
Perergo Larsson, Jerry Mullerns, Frederick Sundo, Bernard Seyches Olaf,
Alex Adam Castle, Matthew Whitting Barno, Wolf, Tim Hollis,
Erika Lenny, John Connors, Philip Fors Connolly. Then the
Mari Robert Windegaruyasi Zup Mark Nes called in Holbrookfield
governor Michael Stormir, Samuel Andre Francis Forti Agnseroro and
Hal Herzognun Macha Joan Labray and Samuel Corriere, Heinz,
Mark Smith, Jore, Tom Hummel, Sardus France David Sloan
Wilson, asilla dearraujoro and Roach Diego London Correa. Yannick
Punter Darusmani Charlotte blinikol Barbara Adamhn Pavlostaevsky nale back
medicine, Gary Galman Sam of Zallirianeioltonin John Barboza, Julian
Price, Edward Hall Edin Bronner, Douglas Fre Franca Bortolotti
Gabrielon Scorteseus Slelitsky, Scott Zachary Fish Tim Duffyani Smith
John Wieman. Daniel Friedman, William Buckner, Paul Georgianneau, Luke
Lovai Giorgio Theophanous, Chris Williamson, Peter Wozin, David Williams,
Diocosta, Anton Eriksson, Charles Murray, Alex Shaw, Marie Martinez,
Coralli Chevalier, bungalow atheists, Larry D. Lee Junior, old
Erringbo. Sterry Michael Bailey, then Sperber, Robert Grassyigoren, Jeff
McMann, Jake Zu, Barnabas radix, Mark Campbell, Thomas Dovner,
Luke Neeson, Chris Storry, Kimberly Johnson, Benjamin Galbert, Jessica
Nowicki, Linda Brandon, Nicholas Carlsson, Ismael Bensleyman. George Eoriatis,
Valentin Steinman, Perrolis, Kate van Goller, Alexander Aubert, Liam
Dunaway, BR Masoud Ali Mohammadi, Perpendicular John Nertner, Ursula
Gudinov, Gregory Hastings, David Pinsoff, Sean Nelson, Mike Levin,
and Jos Net. A special thanks to my producers.
These are Webb, Jim, Frank Lucas Steffini, Tom Venneden,
Bernard Curtis Dixon, Benick Muller, Thomas Trumbull, Catherine and
Patrick Tobin, Gian Carlo Montenegroal Ni Cortiz and Nick
Golden, and to my executive producers Matthew Lavender, Sergio
Quadrian, Bogdan Kanivets, and Rosie. Thank you for all.